【第35页】
The Old Man and the Sea Asiaing.com
“No,” he said. “He can’t be that big.”
But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the surface only thirty
yards away and the man saw his tail out of water. It was higher than a big scythe blade
and a very pale lavender above the dark blue water. It raked back and as the fish swam
just below the surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that
banded him. His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread wide.
On this circle the old man could see the fish’s eye and the two gray sucking fish that
swain around him. Sometimes they attached themselves to him. Sometimes they darted
off. Sometimes they would swim easily in his shadow. They were each over three feet long
and when they swam fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.
The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun. On each
calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was sure that in two turns
more he would have a chance to get the harpoon in.
[90] But I must get him close, close, close, he thought. I mustn’t try for the head. I
must get the heart.
“Be calm and strong, old man,” he said.
On the next circle the fish’s beck was out but he was a little too far from the boat. On
the next circle he was still too far away but he was higher out of water and the old man
was sure that by gaining some more line he could have him alongside.
He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in a round basket
and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.
The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and only his
great tail moving. The old man pulled on him all that he could to bring him closer. For
just a moment the fish turned a little on his side. Then he straightened himself and began
another circle.
“I moved him,” the old man said. “I moved him then.”
He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain that he could. I
moved him, he thought. Maybe this time I can get him over. Pull, hands, he thought.
Hold up, legs. Last for me, head. Last for me. You never went. This time I’ll pull him over.
[91] But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the fish came
alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled part way over and then righted
himself and swam away.
“Fish,” the old man said. “Fish, you are going to have to die anyway. Do you have to
kill me too?”
That way nothing is accomplished, he thought. His mouth was too dry to speak but
he could not reach for the water now. I must get him alongside this time, he thought. I
am not good for many more turns. Yes you are, he told himself. You’re good for ever.
- 34 -

【第36页】
The Old Man and the Sea Asiaing.com
On the next turn, he nearly had him. But again the fish righted himself and swam
slowly away.
You are killing me, fish, the old man thought. But you have a right to. Never have I
seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or more noble thing than you, brother.
Come on and kill me. I do not care who kills who.
Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought. You must keep your head
clear. Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a man. Or a fish, he thought.
“Clear up, head,” he said in a voice he could hardly hear. “Clear up.”
[92] Twice more it was the same on the turns. I do not know, the old man thought.
He had been on the point of feeling himself go each time. I do not know. But I will try it
once more. He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the fish. The
fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the great tail weaving in the air. I’ll
try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy now and he could
only see well in flashes. He tried it again and it was the same. So he thought, and he felt
himself going before he started; I will try it once again.
He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long gone pride and he
put it against the fish’s agony and the fish came over onto his side and swam gently on his
side, his bill almost touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long,
deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.
The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the harpoon as high as
he could and drove it down with all his strength, and more strength he had [93] just
summoned, into the fish’s side just behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to
the altitude of the man’s chest. He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove it
further and then pushed all his weight after it.
Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of the water
showing all his great length and width and all his power and his beauty. He seemed to
hang in the air above the old man in the skiff. Then he fell into the water with a crash that
sent spray over the old man and over all of the skiff.
The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well. But he cleared the harpoon
line and let it run slowly through his raw hands and, when he could see, he saw the fish
was on his back with his silver belly up. The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an
angle from the fish’s shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood from
his heart. First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that was more than a mile deep.
Then it spread like a cloud. The fish was silvery and still and floated with the waves.
The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had. Then he took two
turns of the harpoon [94] line around the bitt in the bow and hid his head on his hands.
“Keep my head dear,” he said against the wood of the bow. “I am a tired old man. But
I have killed this fish which is my brother and now I must do the slave work.”
Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he thought. Even
if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed her out, this skiff would never
- 35 -

